# Monolithic Architecture

In the beginning, there was the Monolith... ðŸ˜€

Building a monolith has always been the default Architectural Style. I
mean, in the very beginning we had one file per application, then we
started having applications with several files, and only since the 1990s
we started to see applications composed of other applications (although
the first experimentations were during the 1980s).

The monolith itself evolved. When applications started to be built using
multiple files, there wasn't much reasoning about them, nor there was a
big need for that reasoning because the applications were relatively
simple. As the applications got bigger and more complex, there was a
need for some reasoning behind what files to create and how to relate
them.

## **Modular Software Development**

Modular Programming was the solution proposed in the late 1960s and
during the 1970s. It was an evolution from classes to a more
coarse-grained explicit definition of code units. Programming languages
implemented modularity with different grades of explicitness.

For example, JAVA has class level visibility of _default_ and _public_,
where _default_ level means that a class is only visible in its package
(module), and _public_ means that the class is visible in and outside of
its package (module). This allows us to define what classes should be
used by the clients of a package.

## **Componentized Software Development**

Another style of modularity are the Components. As explained in [one of
my previous posts](ch02.md),
Components are modules created with a domain concept in mind. They are
ideally standalone "applications" that can be used to create composite
applications. A recurrent example of this style if the pipes and filters
architecture, extensively used in Unix systems and that allows us to do
something like " _ps -ef \| grep php_ ". Another example is the usage of
microservices as components of composite applications, like Netflix.

This style of code organisation also has been around for a long time,
going back to the late 1960s, just like modular software development.

## **The modern monolith**

Nowadays, having a monolithic Architectural Style simply means that all
of the application code is deployed and _run as a single process on a
single node_ . We assume, it is using modules and components, although
it is in fact often not the case.

It's important to understand why the key words here are "deployed" and
"node". Regarding the first one, _deployed_,\sit means that it doesn't
matter where the code is physically stored if it is organised in one or
several repositories, but how it is organised at runtime. Regarding the
second keyword, _node_,\sit means that it is still a monolith if we
deploy the application to several servers, as in a horizontal scaling
context.

In a single node server, _all of the modules in a monolith are assembled
to the same memory image, which is run as a single process on a single
node. Communication is done through standard procedure calls through the
same stack and heap. It's the single memory image makes the application
monolithic. If you are running modules in different processes, you're
doing IPC. Because modules fall into different process boundaries,
you'll start facing distributed computing challenges. That's getting
into_ microservice _territory._ (Thank you for your
[feedback](https://www.reddit.com/r/java/comments/6qmugy/monolithic_architecture/dkz11mt/)
, [\_dban\_](https://www.reddit.com/user/_dban_)

This style, although with very bad reputation, can work very well even
for large applications. It only stops being good enough when we need:

- **Independent scalability** of different domain components;
- Different components or modules to be written in **different
  programming languages** ;
- **Independent deployability**,\smaybe because we have a release rate
  higher than the deployment pipeline can handle for one code base,
  causing the deployment of a release to be slow because it needs to
  wait for the deployment of other releases, or even causing the
  deployment queue to grow faster than it is consumed.

At that point, we need to segregate our monolith into different
applications, in an SOA Architectural Style (more on that in a followup
post).

## **Anti-pattern: Big Ball of Mud / Spaghetti Architecture**

![spaghetti](https://herbertograca.files.wordpress.com/2017/03/spaghetti.png?w=1100)

The "big ball of mud", AKA Spaghetti Architecture, is the anti-pattern
for this style, where the packages structure and relations are not
explicit, structural cohesion and encapsulation does not exist or is
minimal, dependencies follow no rules and it is very difficult to reason
about subsystems, to make changes and to refactor. The system is
**opaque**,\s**viscous**,\s**fragile** and **rigid** : A **Big Ball of
Mud** !

## **Sources**

1997 -- Brian Foote, Joseph Yoder -- [Big Ball of
Mud](http://www.laputan.org/pub/foote/mud.pdf)

2012 -- Len Bass, Paul Clements, Rick Kazman -- [Software Architecture
in
Practice](https://www.amazon.com/Software-Architecture-Practice-SEI-Engineering-ebook/dp/B009GMUL84)

2017 -- Herberto GraÃ§a -- [Microservices architecture: What the gurus say about it](https://herbertograca.com/2017/01/26/microservices-architecture/)

2017 -- Herberto Graca -- [Software Architecture Premises](ch02.md)

2017\* -- Wikipedia -- [Modular
programming](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Modular_programming)

2017\* -- Wikipedia -- [Component-based software
engineering](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Component-based_software_engineering)
