# From CQS to CQRS

When we have an application that is data-centric, ie. implements only
basic CRUD operations and leaves the business process (ie. what data to
change and in what order) to the user, we have the advantage that the
users can change the business process without the need to change the
application. In the other hand, this implies that all users need to know
all details of all business processes that can be performed using the
application, which is a big problem when we have non-trivial processes
and a lot of people that need to know them.

In a data-centric application, the application has no knowledge of the
business processes, so the domain is unable to have any verbs, and is
unable to do anything else aside from changing raw data. It becomes a
_glorified abstraction of the data model_ . The processes exist only in
the heads of the application users, or even in post-its pinned to the
computer screen.

A non-trivial, and really useful, application aims to remove the
"process" burden from the user's shoulders by capturing their
intentions, making it an application capable of processing behaviours as
opposed to simply storing data.

CQRS is the result of an evolution of several technical concepts that
work together to help provide the application with an accurate
reflection of the domain, while overcoming common technical limitations.

## **Command Query Separation**

As Martin Fowler states, _the term 'command query separation' was coined
by Bertrand Meyer in his book " [Object Oriented Software
Construction](https://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0136291554?ie=UTF8&tag=martinfowlerc-20&linkCode=as2&camp=1789&creative=9325&creativeASIN=0136291554)
"_ (1988) -- a book that is said to be one of the most influential OO
books, during the early days of OO.

Meier defends that, as a principle, **we should not have methods that
both change data and return data** . So we have two types of methods:

1.  **Queries** : Return data but do not change data, therefore having
    no side effects;
2.  **Commands** : Change data but do not return data.

In other words, _asking a question should not change the answer and
doing something should not give back an answer,_ which also helps to
respect the Single Responsibility Principle.

Nevertheless, there are some patterns that are exceptions to this rule
as, again, Martin Fowler says, the traditional queue and stack
implementations pop an element of the queue or stack, both changing the
queue/stack and returning the element removed from it.

## **Command Pattern**

The main idea of the Command Pattern is to move us away from a
data-centric application and into a process-centric application, who has
domain knowledge and application processes knowledge.

In practice, this means that instead of having a user execute a
"CreateUser" action, followed by an "ActivateUser" action, and a
"SendUserCreatedEmail" action, we would have the user simply execute a
"RegisterUser" command which would execute the previously mentioned
three actions as an encapsulated business process.

A more interesting example is when we have a form to change a client
data. Let's say that the form allows us to change the client name,
address, phone number and if he is a preferred client. Let's also say
that a client can only be a preferred client if he has paid his bills.
In a CRUD application, we would receive the data, check if the client
has paid his bills and accept or reject the data change request.
However, we have here two different business processes: Changing the
client name, address and phone number should succeed even if the client
hasn't paid his bills. Using the command pattern we can make this
distinction clear in the code by creating two commands representing the
two different business processes: one to change the client data, and
another one to upgrade the client to the preferred status, both
processes being triggered by the same UI screen.

> Provide us with the right level of granularity and intent when
> modifying data. That's what commands are all about.
>
> Udi Dahan 2009, [Clarified
> CQRS](http://udidahan.com/2009/12/09/clarified-cqrs/)

It's good to remember, however, that this does not mean that there can't
be a simple "CreateUser" command. CRUD use cases can perfectly coexist
with use cases that carry intent, that represent a complex business
process, but it's crucial not to mistake them.

Technically, the Command Pattern, as described in [Head First Design
Patterns,](https://www.amazon.com/Head-First-Design-Patterns-Brain-Friendly/dp/0596007124)
will encapsulate all that is needed to execute some action or sequence
of actions. This is especially useful when we have several different
business processes (Commands) that need to run from the same location,
in the same way, so they need to have the same interface. For example,
all commands will have the same method _execute()_ so that, at some
point, any command can be triggered independently of what command it is.
This will allow for any business process (Command) to be queued and
executed when possible, be it in sync or async.

In the book [Head First Design
Patterns](https://www.amazon.com/Head-First-Design-Patterns-Brain-Friendly/dp/0596007124)
, the example given is that of a remote control for lights in a house. I
will go with the same example, although to pinpoint where I feel it
falls short.

So, let's suppose we have a remote control for our house lights and, on
it, we have a button to turn the kitchen lights on and another button to
turn those lights off. Each of these buttons represents a command we can
issue to the house lights system.

This is how such a system could be designed:

![CommandPattern](https://herbertograca.files.wordpress.com/2017/10/commandpattern.jpg?w=1100)

It's a naive design, of course, it doesn't even take into consideration
a DIC and I didn't even use proper UML. But I hope it serves the
purpose, so let's go through the diagram above: As a reaction to input
from some delivery mechanism, the _LightController_ is instantiated with
a _CommandInvoker_ as a constructor argument and a specific controller
action is triggered, ie. the _kitchenLightOnAction_ . This action will
instantiate the appropriate light, ie. KitchenLight, and will also
instantiate the appropriate Command, ie. KitchenLightOnCommand, passing
it the light object as a constructor argument. The command is then given
to the CommandInvoker which will execute it, at some point. To turn the
light off we would create another Action and another Command, but the
design would be essentially the same.

So we have a command to turn the lights on and another for turning them
off. What if we need to set them to 50% power? We create another
command! And if we need to set them to 25% and 75%? We create more
commands! What if, instead of buttons we have dimmer that will set the
lights to virtually any value?! We can't create infinite commands!!!

**The implementation problem** , at this point, is that the logic in the
command will be the same, but the data (the percentage of power) will be
different every time. So we should create a command that has the same
logic and just executes with different data, but then we have the
problem of the interface _execute()_ method not accepting arguments. If
it did, it would break the whole technical idea of the Command, in the
first place ( _encapsulate all that is needed to execute some business
process without knowing exactly what is going to be executed_ ).

Of course, we could work around this by passing the data to the command
in its constructor, but that would not be elegant. It would, in fact, be
a hack because that data is not something the object needs in order to
exist, it is something it needs to execute some of its logic, so that
data is a dependency of the method, not a dependency of the object.

We might also be able to use native language constructs to work around
this, but that would not be elegant either.

## **Command Bus**

What we can do, to solve the mentioned Command Pattern limitation, is to
apply one of the oldest principles in OO: **separate what changes from
what doesn't change** .

In this case what changes is the data and what doesn't change is the
logic executed in the command so we can separate them into two classes.
One will be a simple DTO to hold the data (we will call it **Command**
), and the other will hold the logic to be executed (we will call it the
**Handler** ) which will have a method to trigger the logic execution
ie. _execute(CommandInterface \$command): void_ . We will also evolve
the Command Invoker into something capable of receiving a Command and
figure out what handler can handle it. We will call it a **Command Bus**
.

Furthermore, by changing the user interface patterns a bit, many
commands don't need to be processed immediately, they can be queued and
executed asynchronously. This has some advantages that make the system
more robust:

- The response to the user is sent back faster because we don't
  process the command immediately;
- If because of system defect, like a bug or the DB being offline, a
  command fails, the user doesn't even realise it. The command can
  simply be replayed when the problem is solved.

Having a centralised place where we trigger the logic we need to run
(where we trigger the handler), also gives us the advantage of having
one place where we can add logic that will be executed for all the
handlers, before and/or after the handler execution. For example, we can
validate a command data before passing it to the handler, or we can wrap
the handler execution around a DB transaction, or we can make the
command bus support complex queueing operations and async
command/handler execution.

The usual way that the command bus achieves this is by using Decorators
that wrap around the command bus (or a decorator already decorating it),
in a
[matryoshka](https://carlalexander.ca/wp-content/uploads/2014/12/2318060944_bded6ecaf2_o-1038x576.jpg)
kind of construction.

![CommandBusMatryoshka](https://herbertograca.files.wordpress.com/2017/10/commandbusmatryoshka.jpg?w=1100)

This allows us to create our own decorators and to configure the (maybe
3rd party) command bus to be composed by whatever decorators, in
whatever order, adding our custom functionality to the command bus. If
we need command queueing, we add a decorator to manage the queueing of
commands. If we don't use a transactional DB, we don't need a decorator
to wrap the handler execution around a DB transaction, and so forth, so
on.

## **Command Query Responsibility Segregation**

By putting together the concepts of CQS, Command, Query and CommandBus
we finally reach CQRS. CQRS can be implemented in different ways and up
to different levels, maybe only the Command side, or maybe not using a
Command Bus. For the sake of completion, this is a diagram that
represents how I see a full CQRS implementation:

![2006 - 1 -
CQRS](https://herbertograca.files.wordpress.com/2017/07/2006-1-cqrs.png?w=1100)

### Query side

Following CQS, the Query side will only return data, not changing it at
all. Since we don't intend to execute a business process on that data,
we don't need business objects (ie. entities), so we don't need an ORM
to hydrate entities for us, and we don't need to get all the data needed
to hydrate an entity. We just need to query for raw data to show to the
user and exactly the data that we need in the template shown to the
user!

This is a performance gain right here: When querying for data we don't
need to go through the business logic layers to get it, we only do and
get exactly what we need.

Because of this separation, another possible optimisation is to
completely separate the data storage into two separated data storages:
one optimised for writes and another one optimised for reads. For
example, if we are using an RDBMS:

- The reads don't need any data integrity validation, they don't need
  foreign key constraints at all because data integrity validation is
  done when writing into the data storage. So **we can remove data
  integrity constraints from the read database** .
- We can also use **DB views with exactly the data that we need in
  each template** , making the querying trivial and therefore faster
  (although we will need to keep the view in sync with the template
  changes, adding to the system complexity).

At this point, if we have a specialised DB view for each template, which
makes the querying trivial, why do we need an RDBMS for our reads?!
Maybe we can **use a document storage for our reads** , like Mongo DB or
even Redis, which are faster. Maybe yes, maybe not, I'm just saying it
might be worth thinking about it if the application is having
performance issues on the read side.

The querying itself can be done using a Query object that returns an
array of data to be used in the template, or we can use something more
sophisticated like a Query Bus that, for example, receives a template
name, uses a query object to query the data and returns an instance of
the ViewModel that the template needs.

This approach can solve several problems identified by [Greg
Young](https://cqrs.files.wordpress.com/2010/11/cqrs_documents.pdf) :

- _Large numbers of read methods on repositories often also including
  paging or sorting information;_
- _Getters exposing the internal state of domain objects in order to
  build DTOs;_
- _Use of prefetch paths on the read use cases as they require more
  data to be loaded by the ORM;_
- _Loading of multiple aggregate roots to build a DTO causes
  non-optimal querying to the data model. Alternatively, aggregate
  boundaries can be confused because of the DTO building operations;_
- _The biggest problem though, is that the optimisation of queries is
  extremely difficult: Because queries are operating on an object
  model and then being translated into a data model, likely by an ORM,
  it can be very difficult to optimise these queries._

### Command side

As explained earlier, using commands we shift the application from a
data-centric design to a behavioural design, which comes in line with
Domain Driven Design.

By removing the read operations from the code that processes commands,
from the Domain, the problems identified by Greg Young just vanish:

- _Domain objects suddenly no longer have a need to expose
  internal state;_
- _Repositories have very few if any query methods aside from
  GetById;_
- _A more behavioural focus can be had on Aggregate boundaries._

The "one-to-many" and "many-to-many" relationships between entities can
have a severe impact on the ORM performance. The good news is that we
seldom need those relations when processing commands, they are mostly
used for querying and we have just moved the querying away from the
command processing so we can remove those entity relationships. I'm not
talking here about the relations between tables in an RDBMS, those
foreign key constraints should still exist in the write DB, I'm talking
about the connections between entities which are configured at the ORM
level.

> Do we really need a collection of orders on the customer entity? In
> what command would we need to navigate that collection? In fact, what
> kind of command would need any one-to-many relationship? And if that's
> the case for one-to-many, many-to-many would definitely be out as
> well. I mean, most commands only contain one or two IDs in them
> anyway.
>
> Udi Dahan 2009, [Clarified
> CQRS](http://udidahan.com/2009/12/09/clarified-cqrs/)

Following the same thoughts as for the Query side, if the write side is
not being used for complex queries, could we replace the RDBMS for a
document or key-value storage with the serialised entities? Maybe yes,
maybe not, I'm just saying it might be worth thinking about it if the
application is having performance issues on the write side.

#### Business process events

After a command is processed, and if it was successfully processed, the
handler triggers an event notifying the rest of the application about
what has happened. The events should be named as the command that
triggered it, except that, as is the rule with events, it should be in
the past tense.

## Conclusion

By using CQRS we can completely separate the read model from the write
model, allowing us to have optimised read and write operations. This
adds to performance, but also to the clarity and simplicity of the
codebase, to the ability of the codebase to reflect the domain, and to
the maintainability of the codebase.

Again, it's all about encapsulation, low coupling, high cohesion, and
the Single Responsibility Principle.

Nevertheless, it's good to keep in mind that although CQRS provides for
a design style and several technical solutions that can make an
application very robust, that doesn't mean that all applications should
be built this way: We should use what we need, when we need it.

## **Sources**

(The ones in **bold** are the ones I consider most valuable.)

1994 -- Gamma, Helm, Johnson, Vlissides -- [Design Patterns: Elements of
Reusable Object-Oriented
Software](https://www.amazon.com/Design-Patterns-Elements-Reusable-Object-Oriented-ebook/dp/B000SEIBB8)

1999 -- Bala Paranj -- [java tip 68: learn how to implement the command pattern in java](http://www.javaworld.com/article/2077569/core-java/java-tip-68--learn-how-to-implement-the-command-pattern-in-java.html)

2004 -- Eric Freeman, Elisabeth Robson -- [Head First Design
Patterns](https://www.amazon.com/Head-First-Design-Patterns-Brain-Friendly/dp/0596007124)

2005 -- Martin Fowler -- [Command Query
Separation](https://martinfowler.com/bliki/CommandQuerySeparation.html)

**2009 -- Udi Dahan -- [Clarified
CQRS](http://udidahan.com/2009/12/09/clarified-cqrs/)**

2010 -- Greg Young -- [CQRS, Task Based UIs, Event Sourcing
agh!](http://codebetter.com/gregyoung/2010/02/16/cqrs-task-based-uis-event-sourcing-agh/)

2010 -- Greg Young -- [CQRS
Documents](https://cqrs.files.wordpress.com/2010/11/cqrs_documents.pdf)

2010 -- Udi Dahan -- [Race Conditions Don't
Exist](http://udidahan.com/2010/08/31/race-conditions-dont-exist/)

2011 -- Martin Fowler --
[CQRS](https://martinfowler.com/bliki/CQRS.html)

2011 -- Udi Dahan -- [When to avoid
CQRS](http://udidahan.com/2011/04/22/when-to-avoid-cqrs/)

**2014 -- Greg Young -- [CQRS and Event Sourcing -- Code on the Beach
2014](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JHGkaShoyNs)**

2015 -- Matthias Noback -- [Responsibilities of the command
bus](https://php-and-symfony.matthiasnoback.nl/2015/01/responsibilities-of-the-command-bus/)

2017 -- Martin Fowler -- [What do you mean by
"Event-Driven"?](https://martinfowler.com/articles/201701-event-driven.html)

2017\* -- Doug Gale -- [Command
Pattern](http://wiki.c2.com/?CommandPattern)

2017\* -- Wikipedia -- [Command
Pattern](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Command_pattern)
