# More than concentric layers

In [my previous post in this
series](ch17.md)
, I published an infographic that reflects the mental map I use to
figure out the relationships between the code units types.

However, there was something that I always felt it was not very well
reflected there, but I just didn't know how to do it any better: the
shared kernel.

Furthermore, I figured out a few more things, and I'm gonna write about
it all in this post!

Looking at the infographic I published in my last post of this series,
we see the shared kernel in the very centre of the diagram, looking like
it is within the Domain layer and above the conic sections that
represent bounded contexts.

[![](https://docs.google.com/drawings/d/e/2PACX-1vQ5ps72uaZcEJzwnJbPhzUfEeBbN6CJ04j7hl2i3K2HHatNcsoyG2tgX2vnrN5xxDKLp5Jm5bzzmZdv/pub?w=960&h=657)](https://drive.google.com/open?id=1E_hx5B4czRVFVhGJbrbPDlb_JFxJC8fYB86OMzZuAhg)

Despite its location, I did not mean to imply that the shared kernel
depends on the remainder of the code nor that the shared kernel is
another layer within the Domain layer.

## What is the shared kernel?!

The shared kernel as defined by Eric Evans, the _father_ of DDD, is the
code that the development team decides to share between several bounded
contexts:

> \[...\] some subset of the domain model that the two teams agree to
> share. Of course this includes, along with this subset of the model,
> the subset of code or of the database design associated with that part
> of the model. This explicitly shared stuff has special status, and
> shouldn't be changed without consultation with the other team.

> [Shared Kernel](http://ddd.fed.wiki.org/view/shared-kernel),\sDDD wiki
> by Ward Cunningham

So basically, it can be any type of code: domain layer code, application
layer code, libraries, ... whatever.

![DDD](https://herbertograca.files.wordpress.com/2018/07/ddd.jpg?w=1100)

In the context of the mental map I use, however, I think of it as a
subset of that, as specific types of code. In my mental map, the shared
kernel contains the domain and application layers code that is shared
among bounded contexts in order for communication between bounded
contexts to be possible.

This means, for example, the events that are triggered in one or more
bounded contexts and listened to within other bounded contexts. Together
with those events we need to share all data types that are used by those
events, for example: entities IDs, value objects, enums, etc. Complex
objects like entities should not be used by events directly because they
can be problematic to serialize/unserialize into/from a queue, so the
shared code shouldn't propagate much.

Of course that if we have in our hands a polyglot system, composed of
micro-services developed in different languages, this shared kernel
needs to be descriptive, in json, xml, yaml, or whatever, so that all
micro-services can understand it.

As a result, this shared kernel is completely decoupled from the
remainder of the codebase, from the components. This is great, as it
means that the components, although coupled to the shared kernel, are
decoupled between each other. The shared code is explicitly identified
and easily extractable to a separate library.

This is also quite handy if and when we decide to extract one of the
bounded contexts into a micro-service separated from the monolith, we
know exactly what is shared and we can simply extract the shared kernel
into a library to be installed in both the monolith and the
micro-service.

So to recap, in my mental map, the application core depends on the
shared kernel which contains code, from the domain and application
layers, that is shared between bounded contexts.

## When the language is insufficient...

So, we have the application code with all its concentric layers, and the
application core depends on the shared kernel, which sits below all that
code.

We can also say that all that code depends on the programming
language(s) being used, but that is such an obvious fact that we tend to
completely ignore it.

I am bringing it up, however, because of the question "what do we do
when the language constructs are not enough?!". Well, obviously we
create those language constructs ourselves and thus compensate for the
language flaws. But the important follow up questions I have are "How do
we transmit the rationale behind that code existence? Where do we place
it? How do we make explicit when and how it should be used?".

What I've seen, and done myself, is a package called Utils or Commons
where that code is placed. But this ends up being a bucket where we dump
all the code that we don't know where to put! All kind of different
code, with different purposes and usability (wrapped in an adapter, used
directly, ...) ends up being dumped there, the package has no conceptual
meaning, no consistency, no cohesion, no explicitness, plenty of
ambiguity.

I want to abolish the Utils and Commons packages!

All packages must have conceptual cohesion! When and how a package is to
be used must be explicit! There must be no ambiguity!

So, for example, if our application has some special way to interact
with the CLI, instead of placing it in a namespace
'Acme/Util/SpecialCli' we can put it into
'Acme/App/Infrastructure/Cli/SpecialCli' which tells us that this
package is about the CLI, it is part of the infrastructure of the
application 'App' of company 'Acme'. Being part of the App
infrastructure also tells us that there is a port, in the application
core, to which this package complies to.

Alternatively, if we see this package as something that the language
itself should/could have, we can place it in a namespace that reflects
that, for example 'Acme/PhpExtension/SpecialCli'. This tells us that
this package should be seen as part of the language itself, and
therefore its code should be used directly in the codebase as any
language construct. Of course, however, if another company depends on
this package it might be wise for them not to depend directly on it, it
is safer to create a port/adapter so they can swap it for something
else, but if we own the package we can decide to treat it as part of the
language as the risk of needing to swap it for another alternative is
not that much. It's always about the tradeoffs.

Another example of something I could consider part of the language would
be UUIDs in PHP. I can imagine it is not part of the language because
there is a new version every once in a while and it would be a
maintainability burden, but otherwise it would be a concept generic,
widespread and consistent enough to be part of the language.

So, why not create an implementation of UUIDs and use it as if it was
part of PHP itself, just like we use a DateTime object?! As long as we
control the implementation, I can see no down side to it.

What about Doctrine Query Language (DQL) ? (Doctrine is a port of
Hibernate into PHP) Can we treat DQL as if it was SQL, Elasticsearch QL,
or Mongo QL?

## Conclusion

So in conclusion, I see these 4 major types of code at the macro level,
and I think making them explicit in the code organization can be key for
us to stop ending up with a big ball of mud.

![Explicti_arch_layers](https://herbertograca.files.wordpress.com/2018/07/explicti_arch_layers.png?w=1100)

What, for me, is an unquestionable truth is that **the architecture will
always be there, the only question is: are we in control of it or
not?!**

[ So let's ][ **explicitly organize the code so it helps communicate the architecture** ] [,\sfollow my mental map fully or
partially, follow your own mental map, or follow someone else's mental
map, but please let's use some consistent reasoning to organise the code
and make the project explicitly communicate its architecture using its
structure, its code organisation. ]
