# "Model 1" & "Model 2"

Java Server Pages (JSP) is a technology, a scripting language comparable
to PHP, ASP, or even Python, that is used to create server-side pages
interpreted by the JVM and which can use Java objects.

The first JSP specifications, published in 1998 by Sun Microsystems,
defined two ways of structuring an application so that the presentation
logic would be decoupled from the business logic, and even the use
cases, in an HTTP request/response paradigm.

Some consider these "Model 1" and "Model 2" the first tries at adapting
the MVC pattern, originally intended for a context of desktop software
development, to the web HTTP request/response paradigm. [ ]

## Model 1

The first proposal of the [JSP spec.
v0.92](http://www.kirkdorffer.com/jspspecs/jsp092.html#model) , was to
use JSPs as the only presentation artefact, which would contain all the
presentation and use-case logic.

!["Model 1" ( [JSP spec.
v0.92](http://www.kirkdorffer.com/jspspecs/jsp092.html#model)
)](https://herbertograca.files.wordpress.com/2018/08/beans.jpg?w=1100)

This was probably a good enough approach for most use cases at the time
as most of the web was composed by simple dynamic pages, not by complex
web enterprise applications as we know them today.

## Model 2

The second proposal of how to use JSPs was intended for what was
regarded back then as complex web applications. Keep in mind, however,
that nowadays web application scale and complexity is quite higher.

!["Model 2" ( [JSP spec.
v0.92](http://www.kirkdorffer.com/jspspecs/jsp092.html#model)
)](https://herbertograca.files.wordpress.com/2018/08/scenario2.jpg?w=1100)

In "Model 2", an HTTP request would reach a servlet which would
interpret the HTTP request, execute some use case logic using Java
objects and EJBs (repositories), gather the resulting data and pass that
data onto a JSP which would render the page to be sent back to the
client. In "Model 2" the JSPs are used exclusively as a template engine.

In 1999, Govind Seshadri published an article where he maps "Model 2" to
MVC:

- the Controller would be the servelet, which controls what should be
  done with the user request;
- the View would be the JSP, which determines what is shown to the
  user;
- The Model, both in MVC and in "Model 2" refer to the whole of the
  Domain Model.

## My take on these patterns

As a curiosity, "Model 2" was actually the first version of "MVC" that
I've learned, not so long ago.

In the end, depending on the scope and requirements of the project at
hand, both approaches are still usable today.

That being said, I think that for today's web enterprise applications we
need something better. The problem I see with both patterns is that they
don't respect the Single Responsibility Principle.

When it comes to "Model 1", I hope that the mixed concerns are clearly
visible to everyone: We would be mixing templating logic with use case
logic.

Regarding "Model 2", I see both the View and the Controller as belonging
to the Presentation layer, however, Govind Seshadri makes it clear that
" _[Model 2 architecture should result in the concentration of all of
the processing logic in the hands of the controller
servlet](https://www.javaworld.com/article/2076557/java-web-development/understanding-javaserver-pages-model-2-architecture.html?page=2)_
", although the Domain logic is outside, in Java objects and EJBs.

This means that the "Model 2" Controller contains the use-case logic,
which belongs in the Application layer, not in the Presentation layer.

For example, if we would want to trigger an existing use case from an
event, we would need to duplicate the use-case logic (already existing
in a controller) in an event listener and that is a big no-no because it
leads to harder maintainability and can lead to inconsistencies
throughout the application (bugs).

## **Sources**

1998 -- Sun Microsystems -- [JavaServerTM PagesTM -- Specification
0.92](http://www.kirkdorffer.com/jspspecs/jsp092.html)

1999 -- Govind Seshadri -- [Understanding JavaServer Pages Model 2
architecture:](https://www.javaworld.com/article/2076557/java-web-development/understanding-javaserver-pages-model-2-architecture.html)\
[Exploring the MVC design
pattern](https://www.javaworld.com/article/2076557/java-web-development/understanding-javaserver-pages-model-2-architecture.html)

2018 -- Paul M. Jones -- [Model View Controller and "Model
2"](https://github.com/pmjones/adr/blob/master/MVC-MODEL-2.md)

2018\* -- Wikipedia -- [JSP model 2
architecture](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/JSP_model_2_architecture)
